# Meet Jefferson Robins

This directory contains some poems written by _"Jefferson Robins"_, a fictional writer, the result of applying BACON to the works of [Robinson Jeffers](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poets/robinson-jeffers), an American poet. Thus, the poems written by "Jefferson Robins" were actually generated by BACON after building a probabilistic model of Robinson Jeffer's linguistic style.

Click on any of the following titles:
1. [A lonely place](https://github.com/alexrodpas/BACON/tree/master/output/Jefferson_Robins/A_lonely_place.md) 

If you want to try the extrinsic evaluation of BACON, which challenges you to guess whether some poem was written by Robinson Jeffers or by "Jefferson Robins", do NOT look into the content of these files, since they reveal the name of their author. Go instead to [this site](https://goo.gl/forms/kSwrXXOwt9mmMH893) to launch the online evaluation. 

**Robinson Jeffers**

Robinson Jeffers was born in 1887 in Pittsburgh, PA. The son of Presbyterian minister and Biblical scholar, Dr. William H. Jeffers, as a boy Jeffers was thoroughly trained in the Bible and classical languages. The Jeffers family frequently traveled to Europe, and Robinson attended boarding schools in Germany and Switzerland. 

In 1902, he enrolled in Western University of Pennsylvania; when his family moved to California, Jeffers transferred to Presbyterian Occidental College as a junior. Jeffers graduated from college at 18.

Jeffers studied literature, medicine, and forestry. In 1906 he met Una Kuster, a fellow graduate student. The two fell in love, though at the time Una was married. They married in 1913, the day after Una’s divorce, and moved to Carmel, on California’s coast. 

They lived in Carmel for the rest of their lives, building the stone “Tor House“ and “Hawk Tower,” both of which figure prominently in his work. 

_Source: The Poetry Foundation, The Robinson Jeffers Association._

   
